---
title: "Golden Hour"
date: 2019-12-31T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

This story won first place in the Madawaska Highlander News in the non-fiction category of their short story competition. It was also tied for the People’s Choice award.



<!--more-->

There is a snippet of time in a hardwood bush when an ethereal golden aura descends and marks a special period that heralds the transition of animal movement from daylight to nocturnal activity. From my lofty perch in an old, but well maintained treestand, with my trusty recurve bow across my knees, and the golden light of “magic hour” enveloping me, a drama was about to be played out.

For most of the last hour or so, I had been treated to the beeping and scurrying of what seemed like a million chipmunks as they went about the business of gathering beech nuts, acorns and maple seeds within the blanket of dry leaves that covered the October forest floor. Their antics were both entertaining and annoying as I listened intently for a snap on a fallen branch or crunch in the leaves that would alert me to an approaching deer. The chirping and rustling seemed overwhelming in an otherwise windless perfect evening, as the little creatures, with their cheeks stuffed to the limit, raced over and under logs and wood litter.

And then everything stopped. A deafening silence surrounded me and every chipmunk seemed to have completely vanished! No distant dog barked. No bird sang a night song. No whispering plane crept by overhead. Nothing. I knew something was going on but I did not have a clue what it was as I sat perfectly still in the stand, trying to not even blink as I stared
down at my hunting kingdom in the golden light.

In the natural world, especially where human activity is minimal, the hierarchy of predator and prey has remained unchanged from the time God set all of His creatures upon the earth. The predators are very good at surviving and being successful, both in lean times and bountiful, as the cyclical nature of our world provides. The prey too have almost supernatural instincts to ensure their survival as a species. I was about to be taught a lesson.

And then I heard something moving over the forest foor from my left. A wall of balsam separates a non-maintained roadway from the open hardwoods where I sat and the soft shufing sounds seemed to be coming from that thick barrier. I caught movement from the corner of my eye, something dark and close to the ground was approaching. The racket from
the once-busy chipmunks was completely quelled and the only sound now was the soft disturbance of dry leaves as the dark creature crept closer to the base of my lofty hiding place.

The fisher is a remarkable animal. It is the second largest member of the weasel family – only the otter being bigger. With a deep chocolate coloured glossy coat, this mammal has short legs with retractable claws, and averages 30 to 40 inches long with a 12 to 16 inch tapered tail. And the lone male that was closing in on my tree was on the hunt!

The fisher passed directly below my stand, took two more bounds, leapt onto the trunk of an ironwood in front of me, turned around so his head was pointing straight down, and attened himself against the tree about three feet up off the ground and then remained absolutely still. I sat perfectly still too and so did the unseen chipmunks. And time stopped as the golden light of magic hour began to wane.

It would be hard to determine the attention span of a chipmunk. Maybe like people, some could be distracted more easily than others but the sher didn’t blink, the only movement was the barely discernible rise and fall of its ank as it breathed steadily. A minute passed. And another and still, not a sound could be heard – not a creature moved.

And then, below me and to my left, a yellow leaf moved. The leading edge of the leaf raised ever so slowly and I could see the sher stealthily turn its head to follow the movement. Another leaf moved on the forest floor and another but the fisher was focused on a spot about a metre from its perch on the ironwood. What happened next was a blur of movement and sound. The fisher launched from its tree and slammed into the leaves right on the spot where the chipmunk was emerging. Dry leaves and dust rose through the golden glow of dusk and the fisher emerged from the chaos with its striped prize dangling from tightly clamped jaws. And with three or four more jumps, the fisher melded into the lengthening shadows of the balsams from where it came.

I sat in awe of what had just occurred.

There is a balance in the natural world. Something must die so that something else can live – be it plant or animal. Many have lost sight of this truth mostly because of the technological advancements that have made urban living more appealing. But on their small lawns in the city, the robin must still pull a worm from the ground for its survival.

As the golden light of magic time resolved into the deepening shadows of dusk, I tied my bow to the draw rope, lowered it to the forest floor, and slowly climbed down from my stand. And I once again thought about how we are so truly blessed as witnesses to the beauty and reality of our God-given natural world and the circle of life that He created for all of us.