---
title: "John Prine, Epstein and Me"
date: 2020-04-09T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

The music of John Prine has been woven into the fabric of my life and his humor and wisdom through song and performance has influenced my own writing and playing.

<!--more-->

I only got to see John Prine live and in concert one time. His influence on my own music (I have been a singer/guitarist/songwriter since the early sixties), was profound. Mr. Prine was doing the university circuit back in the early seventies to support his records (yes vinyl records) and had an appearance scheduled at Carleton University in Ottawa a mere 60 miles from my home in the Ottawa Valley. But I didn’t have a ticket and by the time I heard that he was playing, it was sold out.

Like much of the music from that era, Prine’s songs were fresh and evocative and they struck a chord with a generation of listeners and became anthems to the “Tune In, Drop Out” culture that had grown out of the sandal-wearing, tie-dyed subculture movement across North America. His simple musical compositions with roots in bluegrass and Americana were easy enough to play on a guitar, and his lyrics captured the essence of those times with a mixture of humour and darkness in a unique and intriguing style.

The song “Sam Stone” from John’s first and self titled album in 1971 was my introduction to this remarkable troubadour and for the first time in my young life, I was emotionally infected by a song. I never tried to learn to play it because the subject matter was too far out of my own experience to do it justice, but I did sing along in support of the melody.

Back in those days, I was doing odd jobs for cash and playing a few coffee house gigs with a fellow formerly known as Doug and we had incorporated Prine’s “Souvenirs” and “Paradise” into our repertoire. Later I added “Hello In There” to my own set list. 

As it turned out, Doug had a ticket to the Friday night concert and I was pleased that he would be going although I secretly wished I was in his shoes. Doug lived in a small apartment beneath a motel in town that was built as a residence for the son of the owner. When I say small, I mean to say that the ceilings and doors were very low in his place, which was just fine for 5 foot 6 Doug, but it left me with a bruised forehead after every visit. Doug also had a dog named Epstein, a kind of retriever mix with a devious mind that was permanently bent on escape and mayhem. I guess not unlike Doug himself.

On a beautiful spring day, the day of the concert, Doug threw Eppy into the back seat of his old Buick and I climbed in the front and off we went to tour a few backroads and just see what we could see. Back then, we rarely had a destination, let alone goals or even a whisper of a vision for the future. We ended up driving slowly down an old gravel road east of town, tunes on, windows down, just letting time go by. We came to the bottom of a long upslope with a large field on the right, and in that field a dog was running around. Epstein, ever the social butterfly, flew out the window, into the ditch, rolled once and was doing his best to introduce himself to the other mutt. The both ran up the field out of sight of the car.

Doug was out of the car running up the road, yelling for Eppy to come back as I sat in the passenger seat. Doug kept his eye on the field and ran back, jumped on the hood of the car, sat on it, turned to me and said “drive”. I reached over and put the car in drive, slid my left foot over to the gas and started moving up the gravel road with Doug hanging onto the hood. And that’s when it went wrong.

As I came up to the crest of the hill, the road disappeared and I touched the brake, maybe a little to firmly from my position in the passenger seat and Doug disappeared too. The car rolled forward a bit and I felt a thump and then nothing. I jammed the gearshift into park. From somewhere under the car I heard a hoarse voice saying “Backup, backup”. And I thought to myself, if I ran him over going forward, I’m gonna run him over again backing up. So I slid across the bench seat, opened the door and hung my head over to see what was going on. Doug`s white face was inches from mine and the rest of him was under the car. The front driver side tire was on his hand and he couldn’t move it. Ahh! So that`s why he wanted me to back up!

I got myself set up in a proper driving position, put my foot on the brake, put the car in reverse and rolled back a few inches. I put the car back in park and got out. The left front wheel had rolled over Doug`s lower back and I asked him if he could move. Affirmative. As gently as possible, I inched him out from under the car. He was covered in dust and grease and I laid him in the back seat of the four door. Epstein came back and crawled back there with him, licked his face and on to the hospital emergency department we went.

Later that afternoon, when Doug was comfortably tucked into a bed on the second level of the hospital and his body was filled with the “good drugs“, I sat down to hear the prognosis. The doctor had explained that Doug was a tough customer, he had always had that reputation among his friends, and that his strong lower back had absorbed most of the weight of the slow moving car and that impact was not a factor. There was no trauma to his spine, some bruising to the soft tissue and that he would fully recover in a few weeks of bed rest. He would need to remain in hospital overnight for observation.

I told Doug I would look after Eppy and asked him if I could borrow his car and use his ticket to go see the John Prine concert. “You ran me over with my own car,” he screeched! “Yeah well I didn’t mean to”, I replied. “This isn’t over. The ticket’s in my wallet.” he said, as he drifted off in morphine haze.

And that is how I got to see John Prine in a stellar live performance at Carleton U. Doug and I remained best of friends and we played music together for years afterward. He often complained that sitting on a stage stool hurt his back and he mostly now plays standing up in a bluegrass group in Southern Ontario.

I do remember one wonderful warm summer night a year later as I was walking out from between two parked cars leaving the Shady Lady Disco, a vehicle, the lights off, forced me to jump back as it roared past in the parking lot. I didn’t get a plate number, but it did have a familiar Buick silhouette.

John Prine finally succumbed to complications of cancer and surgery on April 7, 2020. His humility and humor, music and songs will be his epitaph.