---
title: "Bertram’s Last Ride"
date: 2020-01-27T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

Dadzapple refers to an apple tree on the road to Long Lake that my father picked from in the fall to bring apples home for my mother to make him a pie.

<!--more-->

A ham sandwich on rye with mustard and maybe a leaf of lettuce, wrapped in cellophane and a sour pickle in a small Tupperware container.  A cold pilsner in a four bottle cooler and lunch on Long Lake at 10:30 a.m. is served. A five-foot Diawa rod and spinning combo sits on a rock, propped up on a forked stick to keep the line up out of the brush. The six pound monofilament disappears into the clear water and is attached to a small snelled hook baited with a hand-picked dew worm, injected with air from a diabetic’s disposable syringe and floats exactly 18 inches above a quarter ounce sinker on the lake bottom. A similar but longer and stronger rod and reel is set up a little further away in a spot that has surrendered its share of rainbow trout in the past. A bite of the sandwich and a sip of beer and the waiting for a fish to share lunchtime continues. My father fished in this peaceful way until he was in his late 70’s. A debilitating illness slowly and finally killed him after 83 years on the planet.

“They don’t bite,” he would say on a particularly slow fishing day. Not, “ I guess they are aren’t biting today, ‘or “We`re not doing too well,“ no, it was always “they don’t bite“. But even on a day that “they don`t bite“, he was never anxious to move on or change tactics. He knew that trout eat worms and sooner or later, one would come along and he would catch it. He would check his bait every 45 minutes and reset. He was rarely `skunked“ and was as content to catch a 12 incher as he was to nail a two pounder.

I don’t know if my father ever fished as a teenager in his native Czechoslovakia, he never said, but when he left his home in the late 40’s to follow his heart and his one true love to Canada, the circumstances of his life journey brought him to take up residence in the frontier Northern Ontario town of Terrace Bay. With help from his brother-in-law John, he was hired as a labourer for Kimberly Clark, the Kleenex company, and he set about to learn English and carve out a career in the pulp and paper industry.  A new life. A new wife. And he would soon find out that he had landed in one of the world’s greatest fresh water fisheries.

John had preceded Dad to Lake Superior’s north shore and had already learned that every lake, stream and river was teeming with speckled trout or walleye or lake trout and pike. And Superior, a two minute drive from their little company houses, would yield “coasters”, big lake run speckles, by casting heavy red and gold Alligator or Crocodile spoons from the surf-pounded  rocky points into the deep green swells of the big lake. Occasionally, the men would foray out in 20-foot outboard powered wooden boats to the Slate Islands. In the inner sheltered bays of the island they would troll big silver or gold Williams Wablers for giant lake trout. Their rigs were primitive wooden spools clamped on to broom sticks, the wire line threaded through an eye screw and attached to the trolling spoons. They would watch the flash of huge lakers chasing the spoons thirty feet below in the ultra clear, ice cold water. Sometimes they would have to wait in the protection of the island bays for the lake to settle down before they could make the seven mile journey across to the mainland to get back home.

The boys came along; Paul in 1952, me in ’53 and Mark in ’54 and in a few years, we were indoctrinated into the fishing and sports culture that predominated small towns across Canada. When we weren’t in our large public school classes, we were playing hockey or baseball and dreaming about fishing with our dad. In those early days, my father worked shift work, and for a time he was the operator of the “Pump House”. The building sat on the shore of Lake Superior, below the town site and it housed the equipment to draw water from the lake and pump it up to supply the residents. In the bowels of the building was a giant screen that filtered larger impurities from the lake water. Occasionally we kids would be allowed to watch as dad pressed the button to mechanically raise the screen to check for debris and inevitably, the trough on the bottom would contain tiny wriggling fish that I later learned were sculpins, a mainstay of a trout’s diet. It was around that time that the “muddler minnow “ fly was first tied and introduced near the Nipigon River, where the world record Brook Trout, a 14.5 pound monster, was caught in 1915.

When my father was working “days” he would take his boys for evening walleye fishing if conditions were just right. I would sit in my class watching the weather outside. If it was raining, which was often the case on the North Shore, I would hope that it would slow down or stop by the time I walked home. If it did, my dad would come from work and load us up into his Mercury and we would head off past the pulp mill, up the Aquasabon River to Spedell’s bridge. There, where the river entered Hayes Lake, we would cast our “bobbers” and minnow into the current and let the flow swing the rig into the backwater behind the bridge and soon the bobber would disappear and we would be on to a fat “pickerel”, the local name for walleye. Glass rods, outfitted with Shakespeare spincast reels with star drags, would bend and shouts of “Get the net!” would ring out.

In those early days in Northern Ontario and before the invention of DEET, bugs mainly black flies and mosquitoes, dominated the outdoors. Black flies especially, were insidious in the spring and early summer when trout fishing was the best. Fishermen were noted by the dried trickle of blood trailing down their necks from behind their ears. My dad employed all manner of concoctions to deter the annoying onslaught of the black horde. I remember 6-12 and Off! in small glass bottles that were standard equipment in our pack or tackle box. We would all rub the stuff liberally on every exposed square inch of skin, tuck our pants into our rubber boots or socks, pull on head nets and off we’d go, hoping we wouldn’t be picked clean to bone.

One year, my parents decided we would spend a springtime week in a little cabin on Walker’s Lake just outside of Schreiber. We arrived midday at the camp, checked out the boat that came with it, got our rods and tackle all straightened and started playing with our first and only Beagle puppy, Bullet. And then the black flies descended and forced us into the camp. Clouds of the relentless blood biters kept us indoors for the rest of the day while Bullet had disappeared into the bush. When the dog crawled back into the camp, he was almost dead. His hairless underbelly was a bleeding open sore and we were devastated and heartbroken at the sight of him. It was the end of the one day vacation and we cried as we packed up and went home, all our fishing plans dashed by the tiny black buggers.

The Aquasabon River flows past Terrace Bay and into Lake Superior, tumbling down through a deep granite gorge, into a large bay protected from the big lake waves by a sand spit and creating a large backwater that, in the spring, hosted giant, spawning pike. Dad normally didn`t go pike fishing. These fierce fish were generally caught incidentally on lake trout and walleye expeditions on the interior lakes. But one sunny day he rounded up the kids and marched us down past the Aquasabon Gorge and onto the banks of the Mouth of the River. Huge pike lay unmoving in the shallow waters within casting distance. With hooks baited with partially frozen smelts, we casted our bobbers out in front of the still fish. Like Jaws, a `V` would form as the giant fish headed for the bait – and in a flash, the bobber disappeared, the monofilament line tensed and our fibreglass rods bent over double as we fought fish that were longer than we were tall. Dad dragged a couple of the toothy pike up the trail to the car, the fish skewered through the gills and mouth to a birch stick, their tails dragging along the rocks and moss,.

Smelt were fished at night. The Rainbow Smelt is not a native fish to Lake Superior – they were accidentally introduced in the early 1900`s from the Pacific or Atlantic ocean and populations peaked in the late 50`s and 60`s and then started a decline to today`s less significant presence. But in the tributaries along the shores of Lake Superior in the 60`s, smelt fishing took on a carnival atmosphere. Smelt spawn in the spring; usually in April when stream water reached 40 degrees F. They would run at night by the millions to be scooped up with dip nets and dumped into buckets for processing later. Dad joined dozens of other young guys at the  hydro tail race, (us kids called it the Tailories) where the water from Hayes Lake, some miles distant and above was piped into a Hydroelectric generating station and then poured out into Hydro Bay on Superior. The generating station formed an unnatural barrier for the spawning smelt and they stacked up there ripe for the scooping. A couple hours of catching, improved by the consumption of large quantities of rum by the bonfires, meant many hours of fish cleaning later in the basement laundry sink. We ate a lot of fresh smelt in the spring, the rest of them were cleaned and frozen in plastic bags for use as bait or food.

Although there were plenty of nearby lakes that held a bounty of natural Brook Trout, there was one that had reached an almost mythical reputation for its remoteness, and giant specs. My dad was a member of a loose consortium of guys that had somehow managed to get a small rowboat into the Craigs Lake. I was never sure if they walked it in or built it onsite. The boat and a pair of oars was housed on a rack in the trees alongside of the lake, but in order to dissuade the riffraff from using it, the last guy to fish with it was required to remove the oar locks and bring them back to town. When another fellow wanted to go up to the lake, he would track down the oar locks and stow them in his pack for the trip.

One spring day, Dad gathered up me and my two brothers for our first overnight fishing trip to Craigs Lake. We picked up a couple of waxed milk cartons of dew worms packed in sphagnum moss from Osmars and my father picked up the oar locks. We kids were lightly loaded for the twisty, rocky trail that led uphill all the way to the trout- filled magical lake. At one point we had to cross a small creek and in a tiny shallow pool we spotted a large trout. In seconds we netted the fish out and found talon marks on his back. Dad said that an eagle must have caught it in the nearby lake but lost its grip as the bird carried it to a tree to eat. It was a harbinger of things to come and soon we crested a hill and Craigs Lake lay before us. We slid the little blue rowboat down on to the lake and packed it with our gear to set up camp on a little island. I was to gather stones for the campfire ring and when I overturned a flat rock, I was surprised to see giant black and red ants crawling underneath. Later that night, I experienced my first nightmare. My screams of “The ants are everywhere”, woke my brothers and father and it took quite a while before I was assured that there were no ants in my sleeping bag.

All of the fabled stories of Craigs Lake were true. As my father rowed around the lake, we kids trolled gold, double-bladed Williams Firefly spinners tipped with a half a dew worm and shouts of “This one’s huge” echoed in the wilderness. We caught two pounders, four pounders and even a couple in the five pound range. My brother Mark insisted on fishing with a bobber from a beaver house and managed to hook a couple of giants. A few years ago, with my old fishing buddy Shep, we enlisted the help of a friend and part-time fishing guide, Gary Salesse who had a canoe stashed at Craigs. We spent an afternoon hooking fish after beautiful fish. I could almost see my dad, rowing that little blue boat in the mist and I could hardly wait to get home and tell him that the mythical lake still remained wild and pristine and productive.

In 1967, Canada’s Centennial year, our family left the North Shore community of Terrace Bay and arrived in Eastern Ontario’s Ottawa Valley. And everything changed. Not only the climate, and the landscape but I rarely saw my father for the next year. He had been hired to help with the start-up of a brand new pulp and paper mill near Portage du Fort, Quebec and spent most of his waking hours at the mill. Fishing was put on hold for him and it would be a while before his new friends started showing him their favourite “put and take” stocked trout lakes. Although the quality of fishing would never come close to the spectacular opportunities of Northern Ontario, my father embraced the new reality and eventually found the solace and satisfaction that only time in the outdoors could provide.

When we first “discovered” Long Lake, the road in was gated by a fellow who had a home and a kind of lodge business. Bill Bompass was a former Game Warden in Renfrew County with a large bush property that encompassed two trout lakes, both teeming with stocked rainbows and one that contained natural lake trout as well. Long Lake was on crown land so the public were allowed to fish it. There was trail that followed a power line that was barely passable, but we did drive our beater trucks in once in a while. Mostly, we would walk the mile and a half uphill to the lake.

The fishing in Long Lake was pretty good – “stockers” making up the bulk of the creel and if they were placed in the spring, they would be approaching three quarters of a pound by fall and were great on the table. And that was the place that my father would spend most of his fishing time. He eventually bought an old Nissan hatchback and later a GMC Tracker to bang his way up the rocky path and sit in the sun on the west shore of the lake. The last time I went with him, I helped him set up his rig, his tired eyes troubled by the fine test line, and we sat watching our rod tips and traded stories of fishing trips past, some that I had heard a few times, some new ones that came to his still sharp mind. Dad was digging in the cooler for his ham sandwich and pickle and a bottle of beer when a two-pounder jumped in front of us, the hook and sinker clearly visible, and the rod arced and Dad walked over and set the hook and he landed the beauty in the unhurried way that defined a lifetime well spent.