---
title: "Still Fishing"
date: 2020-07-10T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

On my kayak seat, on a lake stocked with rainbows and with a fly rod in my hand, it would be hard to believe that anything about fishing has changed for me in the last few years but it has. The wild spaces appear to be wild and the water is still clear and cool but something is different.

<!--more-->

Its pretty easy to figure what is causing me to be distracted this day. Sure, there are campers at this lake, I run into them from time to time, generally on the weekend, but on this Wednesday morning in June, I hear excited children’s voices speaking English and adults conversing in Chinese. Further down the lake someone is playing a radio loud with disturbing hip hop lyrics blasting through the cool clear air.

Its not my lake. Well, it is a lake on Crown Land, so in a sense it is my lake. And there are lots of other ones nearby that I can access in my four wheel drive truck. I chose this lake because it still produces good strong fish and I can easily pull my thirteen and half foot kayak out of the truck bed and into the water. And now that I am somewhat disabled from failed joints and successive corrective surgeries, ease of access has become an important consideration in my piscatorial pursuits.

And as I glide on the flat surface of the lake, I start to ask myself what has changed in me as a fisherman. After all, I have being fishing spring, summer, fall and winter for more than 60 years even though it is not something that I feel that I have dedicated my life to. It is a pleasurable pastime and if it seems that I am a fishing fanatic to some, they don’t know some real fanatics with whom I have fished.

Someone once told me that it is rare to see old men fishing regularly, that the motivation to fish leaves a man and that at some point, that desire wanes and nostalgia takes over. And I suppose that is okay but is it happening to me? Is that what is causing me to feel different when I am on the water? Perhaps when I am standing on my deck on a beautiful evening, knowing that the walleye are likely biting in the river a scant 10 minutes from house and my boat and tackle are ready to go and I have a good selection of artificial bait to catch a few and I decide to sit and play my guitar or finish reading a novel, may be telling.

And so now I consider what compels me to fish now and what has changed. It would be easy to say that its not like it once was, but that can be said about anything. No, there are other forces at play here and I think they have more to do with contentedness than disillusion. My father took us kids into the bush in Northern Ontario when we were just able to walk and I took my son with me when he still needed help to pee from a snowsuit. I became an avid fisherman as did one of my brothers. My other brother and my son, not so much although, they both are occasional anglers. My father fished once a week even through serious illness and eventually until his death of cancer at 81.

I still think that “the tug is the drug” but perhaps it’s addictive hold on me has waned somewhat and if I accept my limitations, whatever chemical pleasure fishing causes in the brain will be maintained. As I sit at the keyboard not fishing, I can imagine the quiet, pristine setting calling me and at the core of myself, I want to be there.

See ya later, I’m going fishing!