---
title: "Bertram’s Last Ride"
date: 2020-03-25T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

My fictional short story recently came first in the Madawaska Highlander News writing competition.

<!--more-->

The black truck rolled slowly down the dusty laneway past the kitchen window. This was the third time the truck with its heavily tinted windows had quietly slipped by and no dog barked to mark its passage. Bertram sat rigidly at the scarred old wooden table, his bony elbows resting on it and his chin on his gnarled folded hands. The table had been here it seemed since the stone house was built over a hundred years ago, or at least here for as far back as Bertram could remember. In good times it had been covered with feasts of venison and beef and vegetables. Now there was just a pot of macaroni, soft simple food that Bertram could boil up to fill himself for a couple of days. The cracked birch top was littered with dog hair and flyers and scraps of paper with block printed phone numbers of names of long disappeared acquaintances that he would never look up.

Bertram’s old dog Lady, whose sole reason for existence was to lay on her side under the kitchen table so that Bertram could hold her front paw, was gone. Her dying was a reminder of how the lives of dogs marked the passage of time in ten to fifteen year increments. His dogs were always named Lady and for the most part they were all black and white female Border Collies. Bertram never forgot the Lady that had lost a batch of pups born late in the fall under the summer kitchen. She had nursed them there when an early December ice storm pounded the farm. Bertram had been feeding her a buck carcass behind the building when her chain got tangled in its horns. The pups all froze to death before she could save them.

The blacked out truck made no sound as it moved slowly through the front yard. Cold ashes in the old Renfrew woodstove lifted in the fire box from the down draft across the stone chimney. The stove pipe would needed cleaning again; a task that required pulling the pipes apart, carrying them outside, tilting them on a bank, stuffing them full of newspaper and lighting the bottom end. The freight train sound of the burning creosote had shaken the house a couple of times when the cleaning was neglected and a chimney fire had sucked the oxygen from the old stone building.

The house stood on a three foot wide field stone foundation topped with rough-hewn cedar beams, the dirt basement floor was crisscrossed with planks for walking on when a particularly wet spring would turn it into a muddy quagmire. Thick stone walls inset with weathered wooden window and door frames rose up two stories. A sagging front veranda with some ragged holes in the tin roof, sat on cement pillars over the front door. Bertram had made the holes in the roof one sleepless spring night after enduring the constant peeping of tree frogs. Loaded up on “Tanglefoot”, a fermented concoction of red flavoured water from boiled beets, sugar and yeast, Bertram had let loose with both barrels of his Iver Johnson 12 gauge, up into porch rafters and then staggered into the house and finally passed out on the couch in the front room.

Bertram had lived, mostly alone with a dog, in two of the ground floor rooms; the front room where he slept on the couch and the kitchen where he now sat. Over the years, other people, mostly relatives, would come and occupy the rest of the house but they never stayed long. Bertram was a widower and although he could occasionally be sociable, he kept to himself when others were in his house. He had been known to lock his doors and play “Lilley Marlene” on the upright piano in the front room for 24 hours straight, banging the bass notes with his left fist and playing the melody with the index finger of his right hand. No amount of pounding on his kitchen door could pull him from his tympanic revelry.

The black truck ghosted past the stone-walled tractor shed toward the foundation of a barn that had stood on the edge of a thirty acre field. Years ago, the roof of the barn had been found a mile away in a neighbour’s bush after being hit by a rare tornado of mythical proportions. The storm, it was told, had pushed an unhitched plow from one end of the field to the other, leaving a deep straight furrow in its wake.

The field was surrounded by a low stone fence, a tribute to the generations that had worked what Bertram called “hazard land”. He would head out in the spring after the frost came out of the ground and start picking the stones that had pushed up over the winter. Bertram used the bucket of his old David Brown tractor mostly to carry his tools; a six foot iron bar, a spade and a pick. No stone was too big for Bertram. He would dig around the huge ones until he could get the pry bar under to lever it up, just an inch, and then he’d drop smaller stones into the gap beneath. Sometimes it would take days but eventually, the rock would magically rise from the field to be rolled away by hand and deposited on the fence.

Bertram was a worn out man. He had been as tough as they come, his ropey muscles powered large calloused hands that were meant for work. He was a passive soul; sometimes he could be fearful, though a couple of times, when he was younger and under the influence, a dormant aggressive trait showed through. The men from the factory where he had worked liked to go out and drink at the local taverns and although he knew God disapproved, Bertram would on rare occasions join them. The last time he went, so long ago, a brutally obnoxious drunk had needled him into striking out and with one round house blow, Bertram knocked him unconscious and into an ambulance. Bertram never set foot in a bar again.

But this spring he did not go out to pick stones, he did not plant the yellow beans, he didn’t cut up any dead elms for firewood – he may have forgotten how. Something had unhooked in his mind. Maybe he banged his head on a beam going down the crooked basement stairs or some weird infection had swollen his brain. He could barely talk and the garbled sounds that came out of his lips sounded like the chatter of Inuit hunters. He wandered around in the old house for days and couldn’t find his dog. He’d sat down at the table – no paw to hold.

In the kitchen everything was quiet except for the occasional buzzing of flies. Those damned grey flies that crawled out of the wooden window frames in the fall and congregated in a warm corner at night. One of them walked across Bertram’s unseeing eye as the black truck rolled to a stop in the yard. The license plate read, “Welcome”.