---
title: "Bears!"
date: 2020-01-13T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

Is it fear or just respect? Bears

<!--more-->

Of all the creatures that roam the forests of Ontario, the black bear has always held my profound fascination and admittedly, for me, bears were akin to a childlike terror of the monster under the bed. Of course, I’m way past that now – unless I’m sneaking out of a deer stand, through the heart of a dense swamp, littered with bear scat, after dark with a bow in one hand and a tiny maglite in the other. And making that journey one night, pretty much soaked in the blood and juices of a recently field dressed young buck, had heightened my senses and prickled the hairs on the back of my neck.

The late October bow hunt had gone very well. The tree stand that I had picked was an overbuilt wooden platform, nestled in the middle of three giant basswoods on the back edge of a rolling hay field with a deep, brushy gulley behind it. Twenty-five yards to the right where the field transitioned into a flat swampy area, stood a wild apple tree that was still dropping its frost killed fruit.

There was plenty of bear sign in that neighbourhood, there usually was, and I could see bear dung under the apple tree from my lofty perch and I had stepped over few piles on the half mile journey to the stand from the little side road where I had parked for the evening deer hunt. One of the branches of the apple tree had been broken down and its fruit removed by a bear that was not content to patiently let the apples fall on its head before consuming.

I sat in the stand as the glorious fall day transitioned to evening, and I observed all of the sights and sounds and smells on this calm patch of the farm. I could occasionally hear a stick break in the gulley behind me and I reasoned that the fork-horned buck that I knew had been hanging around was getting ready to enter the field. I was a little surprised that two fork horns arrived, and they came from the opposite side of the field that I had been hearing brush breaking. With only a half an hour of shooting light left, I watched the twin forkies slowly make their way towards me through the field.

I slowly stood and gathered my trusty old PSE Polaris, a round wheeled, dead quiet bow that I shot “bare”- no sights, and watched as one of the deer turned broadside at 20 yards and push his head into the hay. I am rarely conscious of drawing the bow but I was focussed on a tiny spot behind the deer’s shoulder as I let the string slide off my glove and then watched as the brightly coloured feathers disappeared through the deer.

The young buck reacted with a high back leg kick and then a short run in a small circle and then down into the hay, 20 feet from where he was hit. I thought about chops and tenderloin in the waning light while I waited 15 minutes to make sure he didn’t get back up. He didn’t. In the last remaining light, I quickly field dressed the animal, leaving the gut pile for the scavengers that would make short work of it and then I dragged the deer to the base of the tree stand. I gathered up my gear and started the walk back to my truck, barely conscious in my excitement that I was walking through the dark bush in bear country while stinking of dead deer. But I made it and I fired up the truck to take it back around to the front of the farm to where I could drive through the fields and gather up my prize.

It was black dark as I drove through the hip-high hay towards my treestand and my forky. I pulled up near the tree and left the lights on and walked over to grab the deer. And there it was – gone! I could see the flattened hay and the blood where the deer had been laying but there was no deer. I clicked on my flashlight and I could see the blood trail and flattened hay that led away from the base of the tree. I followed. I looked in my hand and realized it held only a flashlight – I looked back at my truck. I continued on the trail to the edge of the gulley and shined my light down into the brush. What I saw made me slowly back away from the drop off and quietly make my way back to the safety of the warm cab.

I didn’t need a million candle power flashlight to see the white belly hair of the deer lying under the huge bulk of black whose wide apart eyes glowed a menacing green, looking up at me from a mere 15 feet. Nor did I need a hearing aid to hear a single jaw pop.

I’m not sure if I said, “You can have him”, out loud or just in my head but there was no fight in me and I had been beaten fair and square.

In retrospect, should I have tried to hang the deer up in the tree while I went for the truck? Should I have tried to drag him for a half an hour through the dark swamp trail back to my parking spot? I knew there were bears around but I just never really thought that one would claim my deer.

And so I continue to co-exist with bears. I play and hunt in their neck of the woods. I still do get an eerie feeling when I walk in the dark bush coming home from an evening hunt. I don’t sleep well in tents. And other than protecting “my” kill, I’ve yet to meet a bear that was truly aggressive toward me – but you do hear stories!