---
title: "Hunting At Home"
date: 2020-04-23T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

Confidence and humility in equal measure are probably the most important traits that a consistently successful deer hunter must have ingrained. From the soles of your boots to the tip of your arrow or muzzle of your rifle, a hunter must rest assured in the knowledge that no part of the total package has the slightest chance of failure. The humility part comes from understanding that sometimes, things don’t go according to plan and the plan that you so resolutely believed in, can be jeopardized by factors that were unforeseen. But the confidence that had me sitting half way up a low ridge for the fourth time in the last eight days of the Ontario gun/deer season was based on subtle signs on the forest floor in the snow that had a definite pattern.

<!--more-->

I had at that point yet to see the buck that I was after; he was effectively a nocturnal visitor that travelled through my little patch every other night to freshen up a scrape line and to create new ones. A small doe and tiny fawn were in daily attendance but a giant doe that I had a close encounter with near the end of the early bow season had snuck through at least twice in the past week according to the tracks. I did have a doe tag in my pocket and she would be hard to pass up but the sneaky buck intrigued me. His scrapes were not very big and the footprint he left in them was not overly large either and I figured him for a two and half year-old basket 6 pointer with very tasty and tender backstraps. My kind of deer!

A slight warp in the time/visual continuum of my hunting space got me looking to my left in time to see the small doe and eventually her little fawn appeared slightly downwind of my ground sit in some blown down ironwoods. I was pretty sure she made me and she angled out in front and disappeared with her fawn as if swallowed into the ground. My eyes never left the spot and her ear movement was all that I could see. Later I would learn that she and her fawn were in a three foot depression in the ground behind a fallen spruce tree. Very clever! Eventually, the two deer slipped out and disappeared down an old trail and I returned to my vigil on the ridge.

From where I was sitting, I could see my hang-on treestand 30 feet up a towering old spruce. The stand or variations of it have been in place since 1984 and I was totally familiar with every toe hold and grab branch from the bottom to the platform. Earlier in the season, I had sat in the “Spruce Stand” but the cold wind and my ancient joints convinced me that I would be way more comfortable on the ground. The stand had been my most productive spot on the farm and for good reason.

When I first started hunting deer and after I had married into the family that owned the land, I sought the advice of “Grampa”, the patriarch of Greenlough. The old man had traversed every inch of the 300 acres of mixed bush and open fields and he knew every game trails and travel route that deer used in this domain. He told me that deer had only two basic methods of moving; along ancient travel routes between bedding and feeding, and ”escape” routes when they needed to elude hunters and other predators. Even without the aid of topographical maps, Grampa told me about the trails and over the next 30 plus years, I gathered that knowledge.

Years ago, on the eve of my first solo deer hunt on the farm, we sat at his kitchen table in his old stone house and I asked him what he would do in the morning. He said, “drive your truck down to the pit before light, turn it around so that you are facing back toward the south and sit and wait for a deer to walk out and onto the unmaintained road and shoot it in the shoulder.” Simple.  And if I had not been totally in awe of the big dry doe that walked out 60 yards away, I would not have shot over her back and missed my first deer. But what I did learn that day was that there is a game trail that meanders from the red oak ridge to the north to a four acre patch of scrubby apple trees to the south and that is also why there is a tree stand in a giant spruce not 80 yards from where I missed that doe. And why I was sitting along the oak ridge on the eighth day of the 2019 gun season.

By noon on that cold and windy morning, I was getting a bit of a chill and the bluejays, the harbingers of all that moves in the deer woods, had been quiet for a while and so I slipped away and headed back home to warm up and get ready for the afternoon sit. I was back by 1:30 and I altered my route and sat in a spot a hundred yards from my morning sit, but where I could still cover a wide area with my Remington .308 Woodsmaster, a rifle almost older than me but still a tack driver outfitted with a Bushnell three by nine scope to compensate for my old eyeballs. I had kicked out the snow at my feet and I sat on foam cushion on an ancient stump behind a spruce deadfall and waited and watched.

There was a time early in my deer hunting career when I could not sit still. I had to see if there was a deer over the next hill, in the next gully or behind the next patch of brush. It got to where I could almost guess the size of a deer by the length of the white flag waving goodbye over the hill. But it did teach me a lot about a deer’s escape routes and how to fool their survival tools of scent, hearing and most importantly, vision. A deer has real trouble seeing something that is not moving and most of my success has come from taking the shortest route to a sit and quickly getting settled in and then not moving.

Normally, I would not move until the last minute of shooting light but with a half hour of daylight remaining, I slipped back to the edge of the old roadway and stood perfectly still and by just moving my eyes, looked around.

Within seconds I saw movement in the thick balsams to my right. I caught a glimpse of a deer’s back and a leg in the brush and it was slowly walking toward me. And then I saw a bit of bone above an ear. It was heading for the crossing where I had missed my first ever deer and from its body size, I had it figured for a decent buck. I slipped the safety off and raised the rifle to my shoulder, the field of vision in the scope allowed me to see first its nose and then the neck was in the crosshairs and I squeezed. The buck dropped like a stone and I took a step towards it. I looked down at the rifle and saw that the empty shell and a piece of ice were jammed in the action. I slipped my hand into my pocket and grabbed my folding knife as I slowly walked toward the buck that hadn’t moved an inch from where it dropped. I finally unjammed the gun and put the safety on as I stood over top of my trophy. The neck shot was perfect and I poked at an unblinking eye and counted the nine points on the heavy bodied buck. I looked up with a word of thanks to God my provider. Once again I was humbled to be an integral part of the entire natural experience.

With only a little bit of remaining daylight and the help of my headlamp, I started the unwieldy process of single handed gutting. I grabbed a couple pieces of rope from my pack and tied the rear legs up and back and within 10 minutes I had it field dressed and ready for the back of my truck. I was going to need help and I stood in the ever increasing moonlight filtering through the trees and made a couple of quick calls. And soon help was on the way from a buddy who had been hunting 20 miles away.

I stood beside my deer in the moonlight, marvelling at his size and the symmetry of his rack. I took a good look at the feet and saw that they were very small compared to rest of him and I realized that I had been mistaking this fully mature whitetail for a basket racked youngster. My butcher friend had a scale in his shop and after three days of hanging and drying, the buck came in at 210 pounds and it was the first deer that I had ever shot that weighed more than me. Granted, I did shoot some decent deer when I weighed 245 pounds, but there ya go.

Confidence and humility and being blessed to be able to hunt these beautiful animals is by far the most rewarding experience I can have on this great green earth.