---
title: "Cold River"
date: 2021-12-01T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

A Growing Up Story

At first, Jake couldn’t quite figure out the sound that had made him look up from his work lashing branches together for his fort but as he listened more intently, he recognized the wail of a far off siren. He ran to the top of the rocks just in time to see, way down below, flashing lights through the trees on the road that led to the mouth of the river. His heart dropped out of him. What have I done! Donny and Gordy must be in trouble and its all my fault he thought. Jake dropped to the ground and wrapped his arms around his bony knees feeling totally hopeless for the first time in his life. A thick afternoon fog, an almost daily occurrence, started to absorb the lake and the shoreline below and now he was cut off from seeing the town. Jake would never come down off Second Rock — he was too scared.

<!--more-->

The Dakabii River roared down through the rock slides and boulders and poured into a protected bay at the mouth of the river and then quietly flowed into Lake Superior. Jake loved the short car ride with his parents and brothers down to the sandy spit that divided the big lake from the bay where they walked on the beach and had picnics. From his street in the town site above the lake, Jake could see over the bush to the mouth of the river and the big island miles out in the lake where his father and uncle fished lake trout.

The small company town had been carved out of the North Shore wilderness to take advantage of the Dakabii River which supplied water for hydroelectric generation and also to transport thousands of logs for the booming pulp and paper mill. The company laid out the street plans, designed and built small family homes for their workers, schools for the kids, a recreation complex and a central shopping strip. Young couples and single workers came by the hundreds for the good paying jobs and benefits. Babies were born, municipal council created and the self-contained town flourished in the 50’s and 60’s.

Jake loved to fish and wander in the bush around the town site and shoot his green fibreglass bow and arrows or his homemade slingshot (red rubber tire tubing was the best) at squirrels and cardboard milk cartons. One time he accidentally shot an arrow into the radiator of his dad’s 63 Pontiac Laurentian the day before a family road trip. Like most kids, he could find trouble and occasionally tell a fib.

“We’re going to the mouth of the river!” yelled the two kids on bicycles, rolling into Jake’s driveway. Don Plotz and Gordy Jansenn were two of his best school pals, hockey line mates and all round explorers. Their bikes were weighed down with a hatchet and hammer, bent nails, a rope and other stuff. “Watcha gonna do down there?” Jake asked as the boys rolled up.

“Oh just hang around, maybe build a raft.” Gordy looked around to make sure no parent was listening.

The mouth of the river was off limits to Jake unless he went with his folks. His Mom and Dad allowed him to fish and explore the little creeks around town, after all he was 10, but the fast water of the Dakabii was too much for his swimming ability – and too cold.

“I can’t today, I’m gonna go and climb up on Second Rock and maybe start building a fort up there. You wanna come with me?” Don and Gordy looked at each other shaking their heads and said “Naw, we’re gonna build a raft.” “Wait!” Jake cried.

“You’re too chicken!” Gordy shouted and off they went to catch the gravel road down to the lake.

Jake watched them go, knowing inside that it was wrong and probably dangerous, but what to do? Tell his Mom and lose his buddies’ friendship? Follow them and try and keep them out of trouble? Jake shook his head and gathered his tools and headed for Second Rock. Maybe they would roll in after supper with heroic tales of their mighty journey on the sea, chasing pirates, spearing whales or finding treasure.

It took Jake a half hour to climb up to the top of Second Rock after he hid his bike behind the ball field and followed the trail past First Rock. From here he could see the entire town, the pulp mill to the east, belching clouds of stinky smoke that his Dad said was the smell of money. He saw the black stretch of highway splitting the town, its great transport trucks like toys, the houses and lake beyond. He could see railway tracks leading away from the station where the train dropped off a dozen or so Globe and Mail newspapers that he delivered. And to the west he could see the misty canyon that held the roiling Dakabii River as it ripped its way to its mouth on Lake Superior.

Jake climbed to a little cave in the cliff where he had stashed boards and rope and started to figure out how to build some kind of rain proof shelter using the trunk of a Mountain Ash tree and the natural formation of rock but all he could think about was Donny and Gordy and the fact that, not only did he not tell his Mom where they were going, he hadn’t even told her where he was going. He would make sure he was home by suppertime and maybe his Dad would take him and his brothers pickerel fishing up the Dakabii to Snead’s Bridge.

A few people had seen Jake talking to Gordy and Don in the driveway that afternoon but nobody knew if they had all gone down to the river. One person had seen Gordy and Don hanging on to scrap wood that was floating toward the fast water where the Dakabii slammed into the rocks at the bottom of its run and that same person was screaming at them when she saw the raft catapult into the air, and the boys disappear into the boiling water.

It was almost dark, way past suppertime, when Jake looked down the trail to see his brother and father slowly climbing and calling his name. With tears streaming down his face, his Dad wrapped big arms around Jake’s trembling body. “Thank God, thank God, thank God you’re OK. We thought you had gone with Gordy and Donny.”

“Are they alright?” Jake was crying.

“They drowned in the river Jake. They are not coming home. We didn’t know where you were. There’s a lot of people looking for you. We’ve got to go call off the search. We love you Jake”

Two small coffins rested side by side at the front of the sanctuary in the little community church. Jake sobbed but heard the pastor say: “Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honour thy father and mother: which is the first commandment with promise, that it may be well with thee and thou mayest live long on earth.” Jake knew what he had to do.
