---
title: "A Two Deer Year"
date: 2021-11-16T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

And now with the meat from two bucks safely cut, wrapped and stored in my freezer, here’s short story about how it all happened.

<!--more-->

<b>Buck Number One</b>

On Saturday, November 7, my son and his hunting buddy arrived at my house at 5:30 a.m. to get ready for the pre-dawn ride to the areas we had planned to hunt. Skylar my son and I took my Polaris Sportsman ATV through a rough trail to what we call “the lot”, a hundred acre bush of mixed hardwood and balsam, while Jason stayed back at the front of the farm to sit. I walked in to what we called Johnnie Stand One, a chain on metal stand 12 feet up in an oak tree at the top of a ridge, while Sky slipped further down the trail to Johnnie Two.

We texted our safe settling in to the stand and the vigil began. At around 7:30 a doe appeared up the trail to my left and upwind and began rooting in the acorns. I wondered if a buck may be nearby because the chase phase of the rut was on. She was soon joined by a pair of other does and I stood to watch and get ready. After about five minutes of them feeding, they all took off and a buck raced in. He stood amidst a patch of balsams at about 80 yards and I could just make out his outline through the trees. I raised my rifle and through the scope and I could clearly see the left elbow joint and I squeezed the trigger.

The effect of the hit was immediate and the buck raced through the trees and ended up standing 10 feet from the bottom of the tree I was in. I could see blood pouring out of his left side. After about 30 seconds the deer staggered across the trail and lay down and was still. I had my first deer of 2020, a beautiful 2 year old meat deer destined for some fantastic eating. The 308 Winchester 170 grain bullet had completely exploded its heart and no meat was destroyed in the process.

<b>Buck Number Two</b>

The following Saturday found me in the same stand after staying out of the bush for a few days because of unseasonably hot weather for Eastern Ontario. Because I did not have access to cold storage, I decided not to hunt until the outside temperatures dropped. It only takes a few hours of heat to start the decaying process in wild game and I like venison way too much to put it in jeopardy.

So there I sat in Johnnie Stand One in the predawn cold waiting for the bush to wake up. Soon squirrels and chipmunks were scurrying about gathering oak and beech nuts and the cool west wind blew gently in my face. After an hour of sitting, I took out my grunt tube and let out a series of calls. A minute or so later, I caught a bit of movement a couple of hundred yards in front of me along a finger of balsam. A buck was moving slowly toward me and I could see bits of him in the trees. He appeared at the bottom of the ridge I was on and I could see by his rack it was a shooter buck. I watched him in the scope as he made his way toward me and at one point he looked directly up at me in the tree but I was pretty sure it didn’t suspect danger.

The buck was now angling forward and when it cleared a big oak, I set the crosshairs on his neck and pulled the trigger. The deer hit the ground and started to kick a bit which indicated that I had missed his spinal column but had hit him hard. As I watched, after a minute or so he tried to raise his head and I put another shot into his neck and he moved no more. Later my butcher told me the deer had all but bled out from the first shot which took out his jugular and wind pipe. Better safe than sorry was my thought.

The deer was a fighter and had two countable broken points for a total of nine and a body weight of about 170 dressed pounds. He was a leaned out from the rut and and had very little in his gut. Too busy chasing the ladies I guess.

The year 2020 has been pretty crazy with all that is going on in the world and I just thank God for his bounty, His blessing and the peace that He brings me in all things.