---
title: "Ridgetop"
date: 2022-12-08T09:03:08+08:00
draft: false
author: "Jerry Papousek"
categories: "Blog"
tags: ["Blog"]
thumbnail: "https://pic.imgdb.cn/item/658501efc458853aef8aec71.jpg"
headline: true
---

The Setup The "RidgeTop" stand was a sentinel that remained the only setup I had for a little corner of deer habitat that had, over the years, produced a good number of quality bucks and does in an area we called the ponds. The problem was that the hang-on stand, located in a twin trunk…

<!--more-->

Hang-on stands typically consist of a platform and a hinged seat post. The top of the seat post is fitted with a heavy nylon strap that is permanently attached to one side of the post, wraps around the back of the tree and hooked and cinched to a bracket on the other side of the post. Studs on the post are drawn into the bark while similar steel rails on the back of the platform are engaged when the hunter stands on it. The seat post and platform are connected with retractable steel cables. On my setups, I wrap an additional ratchet strap around the tree and the bottom of the seat post to draw the platform studs deeper into the tree.

The RidgeTop stand had been in place year-round for quite some time and when I made the arduous climb up to inspect it in the fall, I knew its expiry date was way past due. The straps that held it in place had mold and lichens growing on them and felt very brittle. The areas of the exposed cables from the seat post to platform were inundated with rust and the studs holding them were also compromised. It had to be replaced. And the entry climb needed rethinking to accommodate someone not quite as spry as they once were.

I had a newer, similar stand hanging in a spot elsewhere that had failed to deliver the kind of success I had had on the ridge so I liberated it from a giant spruce and gathered up some new straps and trundled it up to the ridge. But first I needed a better way up.

Earlier in the bow season, with the help of a buddy, a 14 foot ladder was constructed from cedar poles and 1×6 pine and then strapped into a clump of cedars to accommodate a hang-on stand in another part of the bush. With no real access to raw materials on the ridge, I decided one way or another, I would eliminate the tough climb with a ladder. And I just happened to have a single section of a tarnished 14 foot aluminum ladder around the house. And off we went into the bush with the ladder strapped to the roof of a side by side ATV. We carried it the rest of the way to the top of the ridge.

I was concerned with the ambient sounds from a metal ladder, it would have a bad effect on wary deer, but after digging the feet into the ground and strapping it to the tree, only clumsiness caused any sound during the climb or descent.

From the top of the ladder, firmly attached to the tree with my safety rope, I pulled the stand up and hung it five feet below the incumbent stand and climbed in to look around. Almost perfect except the need for a couple screw in tree steps for ease of entry and the removal of the old stand. Standing on the new stand, I attached a rope securely to the old one, tied it off and cut the straps. And it didn’t move!The tree had grown enough that the four points of contact on the stand were firmly embedded. I would need to come back with tools and make a third disruptive foray onto the ridge and with only a couple of days before the rifle opener, I hoped all the activity wouldn’t effect the natural patterns of the resident deer.

Armed with a drill, crowbar and heavy hammer, I returned the following day. I was able to force start the recovery of a couple of redundant lower screw-in tree steps (they were grown in too) and then drill pilot holes and reload them up nearer the new stand placement. I could not budge the old stand with the crowbar but with a few solid whacks with the sledge, it gave up and I lowered it to the ground 18 feet below. I sat down and looked around declared the new and improved Ridgetop stand ready to hunt and with only three days to spare.

<b>The Payoff</b>

I was awake when the alarm went off at 5 am. Monday, November 7 and pulled on my base layers and headed down to check wind and temperature. A steady SSE breeze was blowing and the air was at 7 degrees C. Not too cold and an OK wind direction for the Ridgetop. At 5;45 my son’s truck rolled in and we got dressed and loaded the ATV for the ride up to the ponds. The plan was for me to get dropped off for a short walk to the ridge and I gathered my gear and flashlight and started walking at 6:10. I only needed the flashlight for the thick section of cover near the ponds and I switched it off to walk the rest of the way to the stand. When I got to the tree, I grabbed a hang-on felt key and doused it with Tinks x69 Doe-in-Heat scent and attached it to a low branch 30 feet in front of my stand. After tying my old Remington Woodsmaster 740 rifle to the pull up rope, I quietly climbed into the new stand and tied in my safety harness strap. I brought a small screw-in hook for my gun and when that was secured a pulled up my rifle and raised it to my eye. The image in the Bushnell Banner Dusk and Dawn scope was very clear so I hung up the rifle and checked the time – legal shooting light had arrived. Carefully I retrieved my rattling horns from my pack and layed them on my lap. I slid my grunt tube out from under my jacket and blew three soft calls and tucked it back in. It could not have been more than 20 seconds later when I caught movement to my right. A decent small racked buck was slowly and quietly walking right toward me and heading for the scent key. When his head went behind a giant pine tree in front of me I slowly reached for the gun and brought it to my shoulder. The two year old buck (the best eating of them all), stepped out from behind the pine and into my cross hairs. When I settled for the shot behind the front shoulder, deer was only 20 feet from the bottom of my tree and I squeezed the trigger.

The effect of the Federal 308 180 grain bullet hitting the deer was immediate. He reared back and hit full stride in the direction he had been facing and slammed into a three inch ironwood tree 20 yards away. He bounced off the tree onto his side, kicked twice and then let out a quiet groan and never moved again. It was amazing. Ten minutes into the 2022 gun season, this beautiful animal on the ground in front of me would provide many great meals for my family.

When I climbed down out of the Ridgetop stand and stood over my marvellous deer, I thanked God for always delivering on his promise that He would bless those who bless Him. I know that he directed my hands and my thoughts to not only rebuild the Ridgetop stand but to use my God-given hunting wisdom to be successful and secure the bounty that He promises.

<b>Genesis 9:3</b>

Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you. And as I gave you the green plants, I give you everything.
